---
title: "Approximating π using Monte Carlo properly"
category: programming
layout: post
---

## Approximating \\(\pi\\) using Monte Carlo
A Monte Carlo algorithm uses random variables to approximate some
solution to which the solution might be unfeasable to calculate
directly. The example of choice of every professor I know of is to
[approximate \\( \pi = 3.14\dots \\)](http://www.eveandersson.com/pi/monte-carlo-circle).

The procedure is at first glance simple enough:

1. Generate \\( n \\) samples uniformly from the unit square,\\(X\_i= (x\_i, y\_i) \sim Un([0, 1]^2) \\) 
2. If \\( x\_i ^2 + y\_i^2 \leq 1 \\) then the point in inside the unit
   circle. Count them as \\( n\_+\\)
3. Since the area of the unit circle is known to be \\(\pi\\) and we
   generate points over only a forth of it. Therefore
   \\[ \pi = 4\, p((x\_i, y\_i)\in B) \approx 4\, \frac{n\_+}{n} \\]

But when it comes to the error estimate the method breaks down. Some
suggest to run the simulation again and again, but that's more
than wasteful. That is because the method is using statistics without
really understanding it.

## ... properly
Actually we throw away much information if we just take the mean to
approximate \\(p\\). The decision if a point that is randomly generated
is in the circle is actually distributed as Bernoulli (1 with
probability \\(p\\) and 0 with probability \\(1-p\\) ).

Now we can estimate \\(p\\) smarter if we 
[recognize](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_distribution#Rule_of_succession) it to be
[Beta distributed](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Beta_distribution) -- or
its estimate to be Beta distributed if you want to be frequentist. The
Bayes estimator (assuming a uniform prior) is \\[ \hat p\_\sim
  Beta(1+n\_+, 1 + n - n\_+)\\]
with the expected value for \\(p\\) being \\(\mathbb{E}(\hat p) =
\frac{1+n\_+}{1+n}\\) and thus the same as the naive approach except for
some smoothing. The variance is 
\\[ var(\hat p) = \frac{(1+n\_+)\, (1+n-n\_+))}{(2+n)^2\, (n+3)} \\]
but since you have the full posterior probability distribution, you can
be much more precise if you'd like.
